File: 1693220896.pdf
Total Pages: 8

=== PAGE 1 ===
 
Syllabus for Uchcha Madhyamic Paper II STET 2023  
Syllabus UNIT I Subject ----------Computer Science 100 Marks  
 
 
Unit 1: Digital Logic 
 Data and number systems;Binary, Octal and Hexa decimal representation and  
their  conversions ;BCD,ASCII, EBDIC, Gray codes and their conversions; 
Signed binary number representation with 1’s and 2’s complement methods, 
Binary arithmetic. Venn diagram, Boolean algebra; Various Logic gates-their 
truth tables and circuits; Representation in SOP and POS forms;Minimization 
of logic expressions by algebraic method, Kmap method  
 Combinational circuits-Adder and Subtractor circuits;Applications and circuits 
of  Encoder ,Decoder, Comparator ,Multiplexer, De-Multiplexe rand  Parity 
Generator. Memory Systems:RAM ,ROM, EPROM, EEROM, Design of 
combinational  circuits-using  ROM, Programming logic devices and gate 
arrays. (PLAs and PLDs)  
 Sequential Circuits-Basic  memory element-S-R, J-K,D and T Flip Flops, 
various  types  of Registers  and counters and their  design,Irregular counter, 
State table and  state  transition diagram,sequential  circuits design methodology.  
 Different  types of A/D and  D/A  conversion techniques. Logic  families-
TTL,ECL,MOS  and  CMOS, their  operation  and  specifications. 
Unit 2:Computer Organization and Architecture 
 Introduction to Data Representation and Number System: Introduction to 
Decimal, Binary, Octal, Hexadecimal number system,  Conversation of number 
from one number system to another number system (like Decimal to Binary etc.), 
Binary Arithmetic: - Addition (Simple Method, Using 1’s Complement, Using 
2’sComplement method), Subtraction (Simple Method), Multiplication (Simple 
Method), Division (Simple Method) 
 Different Codes  Representation of Error Detection Codes: Parity Bit Method, 
Checksum Method, Representation of Error Correction Code: Hamming Code, 
Alphanumeric Codes: ASCII,  EBCDIC, Excess – 3 Code, BCD Addition 
Method, Gray Code: Gray to Binary Conversion, Binary to Gray Conversion 
 Introduction to Ideal Microcomputer, An Actual Microcomputer: CPU, Address 
Bus, Data Bus, Control Bus, Memory: RAM - SRAM, DRAM, ROM - PROM, 
EPROM, UVEPROM,  EEPROM, History of Microprocessor, Microcontroller 
(Application Only), Addressing  Techniques, Introduction To Digital 
Electronics, Logic Gates: Inverter, OR Gate, AND  Gate, NOR Gate, NAND 
Gate, EX-OR Gate, EX-NOR Gate, De’Morgan’s Theorems 
 Universal Gates (Only for Logic Conversion), K-Map Simplifications, Pair, 
Quad, Octet  (upto 4 variables) Don’t Care Condition, Arithmetic Logic Unit: 
Half Adder, Full Adder, Binary Adder,2’s Complement Adder Subtractor  
Unit 3:Programming and data structure 
 Data, Entity, Information, Difference between Data and Information, Data type , 
Build in data type, Abstract data type, Definition of data structures, Types of 
Data Structures: Linear and Non-Linear Data Structure, Introduction to 
Algorithms: Definition of Algorithms, Difference between algorithm and 
programs, properties of algorithm, Algorithm Design Techniques, Performance 

=== PAGE 2 ===
Analysis of Algorithms, Complexity of various code structures, Order of 
Growth, Asymptotic Notations.  
 Definition, Single and Multidimensional Arrays, Representation of Arrays: 
Row Major Order, and Column Major Order, Derivation of Index Formulae for 
1-D,2-D Array Application of arrays, Sparse Matrices and their representations.  
Recursion: recursion in C, example of recursion, Tower of Hanoi Problem, 
simulating recursion, Backtracking,, recursive algorithms, principles of 
recursion.  
 Array Implementation and Pointer Implementation of Singly Linked Lists, 
Doubly Linked List, Circularly Linked List, Operations on a Linked List. 
Insertion, Deletion, Traversal, Polynomial Representation and Addition 
Subtraction & Multiplications of Single variable.  
 Abstract Data Type, Primitive Stack operations: Push & Pop, Array and Linked 
Implementation of  Stack in C, Application of stack: Prefix and Postfix  
Expressions, Evaluation of postfix expression, Iteration and Recursion- 
Principles of recursion, Tail recursion, Removal of recursion Problem  
 solving using iteration and recursion with examples such as binary search, 
Fibonacci numbers, and Hanoi towers.  
 Operations on Queue: Create, Add, Delete, Full and Empty, Circular queues, 
Array and linked implementation of queues in C, Dequeue and Priority Queue.  
 Concept of Searching, Sequential search, Index Sequential Search, Binary 
Search. Concept of  Hashing & Collision resolution Techniques used in Hashing.  
 Insertion Sort, Selection Sort, Bubble Sort, Heap Sort, Comparison of Sorting 
Algorithms, Sorting in  Linear Time: Counting Sort and Bucket Sort.  
 Terminology used with Graph, Data Structure for Graph Representations: 
Adjacency Matrices,  Adjacency List, Adjacency. Graph Traversal: Depth First 
Search and Breadth First Search, Connected Component.  
 Basic terminology used with Tree, Binary Trees, Binary Tree Representation: 
Array  Representation and Pointer (Linked List) Representation, Binary Search 
Tree, Complete Binary  Tree, A Extended Binary Trees, Tree Traversal 
algorithms: Inorder, Preorder and Postorder,  Constructing Binary Tree from 
given Tree Traversal, Operation of Insertion, Deletion, Searching & 
Modification of data in Binary Search Tree. Threaded Binary trees, Huffman 
coding using Binary Tree, AVL Tree and B Tree 
Unit 4:Algorithms 
 Algorithm Analysis, Time Space Tradeoff, Asymptotic Notations, Conditional 
asymptotic notation, Removing condition from the conditional asymptotic 
notation, Properties of  big-Oh notation.  
 Recurrence equations, Solving recurrence equations, Analysis of linear search, 
Divide  
 and Conquer: General Method, Binary Search, Finding Maximum and 
Minimum, Merge Sort.  
 General Method, Multistage Graphs, All-Pair shortest paths, Optimal binary 
search trees.  
 General Method, 8-Queens problem, Hamiltonian problem.  
 Connected Components, Spanning Trees, Biconnected components, 
Introduction to NP Hard and NP-Completeness. 
Unit 5:Operating System 

=== PAGE 3 ===
 Introduction to OS – its functional behavior and responsibilities, Need for some 
of monitor / command interpreter, Types of operating systems, System structure, 
Hierarchical and layered organization of OS, I/O methods and interrupt 
structure.  
 Process definition, Process states and state transitions, Parallel processes and 
constructs, Process interaction, Operating system kernel, Data structures for 
processes and resources, Context switching, Process control primitives, Process 
scheduling.  
 The determinacy problem, Mutual exclusion, Semaphores, Process 
synchronization,  
 Conditional critical regions and monitors, Inter-process communication, 
Deadlock problem and its solutions.  
 Memory management concepts, Relocation, Linking, Multiprogramming with 
fixed  
 partitions, Swapping, Variables partitions, Overlays, Virtual memory, 
Segmentation, Paging, Storage allocation strategies, Load control and thrashing  
 Organization of file and I/O subsystems, Directory management, Basic file 
system, file descriptors, File manipulation, File organization methods, 
Management of auxiliary storage  space, Command language and file system 
utilities, I/O subsystems, Programmed I/O, DMA, Interrupt driven I/O, 
Recovery procedures. Protection and Security: Safeguards, Penetration, Access 
and Information flow control, Protection problems, Formal models of  
protection. 
Unit 6:Database Management System 
 Introduction to Database, components and structure of DBMS – logical 
structure – the 3 level architecture and mapping among them. Comparison 
between traditional file based system and DBMS. Advantages and drawbacks 
of DBMS. 
 Relational Model - What is relational model, Relational key constraints – 
candidate key, primary key, foreign key.ER Model – entities, attributes, 
relationship, and cardinality. Entity types, Entity sets Attributes and Keys 
Relationship types, Relationship Sets, converting ER diagram to relational 
tables. Database Schema  
 Database Anomalies, CODD Rules and Normalization theory, 1 NF, 2 NF, 3 
NF and BCNF. 
 Introduction to transaction and concept of concurrency control. Transaction and 
system concepts, desirable properties of   transactions, transaction support in 
SQL. Concurrency control techniques, the locking protocol, serializable 
schedules, locks, 2 phase commit.  Techniques, concurrency control based on 
timestamp ordering 
Unit 7:Computer Network 
 Introduction to Data Communication and Computer Network, Network 
Topologies, classification of computer network, Parallel & Serial Transmission, 
Transmission Models, Transmission Channel, Data Rate, Bandwidth Signal 
Encoding Schemes, Data Compression, Transmission Impairments, Layering 
and Design Issues, OSI Model and TCP/ IP model. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
 Data Link Layer: Need for Data Link Control, Frame Design Consideration, 
Flow Control & Error Control. MAC sublayer, contention based and polling 
based MAC protocols.  
 Network Layer: Routing, Congestion control, Internetworking principles, 
Internet Protocols (IPv4, packet format, Hierarchal addressing sub netting, ARP, 
PPP), Bridges, Routers. Classless IP address. 
 Datalink Layer: Process to process communication. Socket meaning and socket 
address. Upward and downwards multiplexing. UDP and TPDU. 
 Application Layer: HTTP, FTP, Telnet, SMTP, SNMP 
Unit 8: Software Engineering 
 Introduction to Software Engineering: Characteristics, Emergence of Software 
Engineering, Software Metrics & Models, Process & Product Metrics. Software 
Life Cycle Models: Waterfall, Prototype and Spiral Models and their 
Comparison. 
 Software Project Management: Size Estimation- LOC and FP Metrics, Cost 
Estimation-Delphi and Basic COCOMO, Introduction to Halstead’s Software 
Science, Staffing Level Estimation- Putnam’s Model. Software Requirements 
Specification: SRS Documents, their Characteristics and Organization. 
 Software Design: Classification, Software Design Approaches, Function 
Oriented Software Design, Structured Analysis- Data flow Diagrams and 
Structured Design, Introduction to Object Oriented Design. 
 Coding and Testing of Software: Unit Testing, Block Box Testing, White Box 
Testing, Debugging, Program Analysis Tools, System Testing. Software 
Reliability and Quality Assurance: Reliability Metric- Musa’s Basic Model. 
 Software Quality Assurance: ISO 9000 and SEI CMM and their Comparison. 
Software Maintenance: Maintenance Process Models and Reverse Engineering, 
Estimation of Maintenance Costs. 
Unit 9: Object Oriented Programming  
 Review of Fundamentals of Procedural Programming, 
 Class and Objects,  
 Data Abstraction, 
 Information Hiding & Encapsulation, 
 Constructors, destructors, and object creation, 
 Name space and references , 
 Class Methods , Methods Overloading , 
 Inheritance , 
 Polymorphism ,  
 Abstract Classes, 
 Abstract Methods , 
 Exceptions , Exception Handling. 
Unit 10: Web-Based Application Development 
 Internet Basics, 
 Introduction to Web Development, 
 Node.js and Git, 
 HTML, CSS, JQuery, 
 JavaScript and HTTP (forms), 
 Sessions and HTTP,  

=== PAGE 5 ===
 Javascript & Document Object Model – DOM, 
 Extensible Markup Language – XML, 
 Document Type Definition - DTD Dreamweaver, 
 PHP HyperText PreProcessor - PHP SQL & MySQL, 
 Integrating PHP and MySQL,Database Interaction 
Unit 11: Theory of Computatio 
 Introduction; Alphabets, Strings and Languages; Automata and Grammars, 
Deterministic finite Automata (DFA)-Formal Definition, Simplified notation: 
State transition graph, Transition table, Language of DFA, Non-deterministic 
finite Automata (NFA), NFA with epsilon transition, Language of NFA, 
Equivalence of NFA and DFA, Minimization of Finite Automata, 
Distinguishing one string from other.  
 Regular expression (RE) , Definition, Operators of regular expression and their 
precedence, Algebraic laws for Regular expressions, Kleen’s Theorem, Regular 
expression to FA, DFA to Regular expression, Arden Theorem, Non Regular 
Languages, Pumping Lemma for regular Languages . Application of Pumping 
Lemma, Closure properties of Regular Languages, Decision properties of 
Regular Languages, FA with output: Moore and Mealy machine, Equivalence 
of  Moore and Mealy Machine, Applications and Limitation of FA.  
 Context free grammar (CFG) and Context Free Languages (CFL): Definition, 
Examples, Derivation ,Derivation trees, Ambiguity in Grammer, Inherent 
ambiguity, Ambiguous to Unambiguous CFG, Useless symbols, Simplification 
of CFGs, Normal forms for CFGs: CNF and GNF, Closure properties of CFLs, 
Decision Properties of CFLs: Emptiness, Finiteness and Memership, Pumping 
lemma for  CFLs.  
 Push Down Automata (PDA): Description and definition, Instantaneous 
Description, Language of PDA, Acceptance by Final state, Acceptance by 
empty stack, Deterministic PDA, Equivalence of PDA and CFG, CFG to PDA 
and PDA to CFG, Two stack PDA  
 Turing machines (TM): Basic model, definition and representation, 
Instantaneous Description, Language acceptance by TM, Variants of Turing 
Machine, TM as Computer of Integer functions, Universal TM, Church’s Thesis, 
Recursive and recursively enumerable languages, Halting problem, 
Introduction to Undecidability, Undecidable problems about TMs. Post 
correspondence problem (PCP), Modified PCP, Introduction to recursive 
function theory 
Unit 12:Internet of Things 
 Definitions and Functional Requirements - Motivation - Architecture - Web 3.0 
View of IoT - Ubiquitous IoT Applications - Four Pillars of IoT - DNA of IoT 
-The Toolkit Approach for End-user Participation in the Internet of Things. 
Middleware for IoT: Overview -Communication middleware for IoT - IoT 
Information Security. 
 Protocol Standardization for IoT - Efforts - M2M and WSN Protocols - SCADA 
and RFID Protocols- Issues with IoT Standardization - Unified Data Standards 
-Protocols -IEEE 802.15.4 - BACNet Protocol Modbus - KNX - Zigbee-
Network layer - APS layer –Security. 
 Web of Things versus Internet of Things - Two Pillars of the Web - Architecture 
standardization for WoT Platform Middleware for WoT - Unified Multitier 
WoT Architecture - WoT Portals and Business Intelligence. Cloud of Things: 

=== PAGE 6 ===
Grid/SOA and Cloud Computing - Cloud Middleware - Cloud Standards - 
Cloud Providers and Systems - Mobile cloud Computing - The Cloud of Things 
Architecture. 
 Industrial Internet of Things -   Introduction  to Industrial Internet of Things -   
Industrie 4.0 - Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) -   IIoT Architecture -   Basic 
Technologies -   Applications and Challenges -  Security and Safety -  
Introduction to Security and Safety  -Systems Security -  Network Security -  
Generic Application Security -  Application Process Security and Safety  - 
Reliable-and-Secure-by-Design IoT Applications -   Run-Time Monitoring -   
The ARMET Approach -   Privacy and Dependability 
 The Role of the Internet of Things for Increased Autonomy and Agility in 
Collaborative Production Environments -Resource Management in the Internet 
of Things: Clustering, Synchronization and Software Agents. Applications -
Smart Grid -Electrical Vehicle charging 
Unit 13:Artificial Intelligence 
 INTRODUCTION TO Al AND PRODUCTION SYSTEMS: Introduction to 
AI-Problem formulation, Problem Definition -Production systems, Control 
strategies, Search strategies. Problem characteristics, Production system 
characteristics - Specialized productions system- Problem solving methods – 
Problem graphs, Matching, Indexing and Heuristic functions -Hill Climbing-
Depth first and Breath first, Constraints satisfaction – Related algorithms, 
Measure of performance and analysis of search algorithms. 
 REPRESENTATION OF KNOWLEDGE: Game playing – Knowledge 
representation, Knowledge representation using Predicate logic, Introduction to 
predicate calculus, Resolution, Use of predicate calculus, Knowledge 
representation using other logic-Structured representation of knowledge. 
 KNOWLEDGE INFERENCE: Knowledge representation -Production based 
system, Frame based system. Inference – Backward chaining, Forward chaining, 
Rule value approach, Fuzzy reasoning – Certainty factors, Bayesian Theory-
Bayesian Network-Dempster – Shafer theory. 
 PLANNING AND MACHINE LEARNING: Basic plan generation systems – 
Strips -Advanced plan generation systems – K strips - Strategic explanations -
Why, Why not and how explanations. Learning- Machine learning, adaptive 
Learning. 
 EXPERT SYSTEMS: Expert systems – Architecture of expert systems, Roles 
of expert systems – Knowledge Acquisition – Meta knowledge, Heuristics. 
Typical expert systems – MYCIN, DART, XOON, Expert systems shells. 
Unit 14: Fundamental of E-Commerce 
 Introduction to Electronic Commerce: Introduction of commerce, Electronic 
commerce framework, electronic commerce and media convergence, the 
anatomy of e-commerce application. 
 The Network for Electronic Commerce: Need of network, market forces 
influencing the I-way, components of I-way, network access equipment, and 
global information distribution network. 
 The Internet as a Network Infrastructure: Introduction, the Internet terminology, 
NSFNET: Architecture and Components, Internet governance: The Internet 
Society. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
 Network Security & Firewalls: Client-Server network security, security threats 
in client-server, firewalls and network security, data & message security, 
encrypted documents and electronic mail. 
 Electronic Commerce & World Wide Web: Introduction, architectural 
framework for electronic commerce, WWW as an architecture, security in the 
web. 
 Consumer Oriented Electronic Commerce: Introduction, consumer oriented 
application, mercantile process models, mercantile models from the consumer’s 
perspective, mercantile models from the merchant’s perspective. 
 Electronic Payment Systems: Introduction, types of electronic payment system, 
digital token based electronic payment systems, smart cards and electronic 
payment systems, credit cards systems, Threat on electronic payment system. 
 Inter-organizational Commerce & Electronic Data Interchange: Introduction, 
EDI application in business, EDI: legal, security, and privacy issues, EDI and 
electronic commerce. 
 The Corporate Digital Library: Introduction, dimensions of electronic 
commerce systems, types of digital documents, Issues behind document 
infrastructure, corporate data warehouses. 
Unit 15: Multimedia 
 Definition - Classification - Multimedia application -Multimedia Hardware - 
Multimedia software - CDROM - DVD.  
 Multimedia Audio: Digital medium - Digital audio technology - sound cards - 
recording - editing - MP3 - MIDI fundamentals - Working with MIDI - audio 
file formats - adding sound to Multimedia project.  
 Multimedia Text: Text in Multimedia -Multimedia graphics: coloring - digital 
imaging fundamentals - development and editing - file formats - scanning and 
digital photography.  
 Multimedia Animation: Computer animation fundamentals - Kinematics - 
morphing - animation s/w tools and techniques. Multimedia Video: How video 
works - broadcast video standards - digital video fundamentals – digital video 
production and editing techniques - file formats.  
 Multimedia Project: stages of project - Multimedia skills - design concept - 
authoring - planning and costing –Multimedia Team. Multimedia-looking 
towards Future: Digital Communication and New Media, Interactive Television, 
Digital Broadcasting, Digital Radio, Multimedia Conferencing 
Syllabus for Art of Teaching and Other Skills STET 2023     
Unit II Art of Teaching, Other skills                                  Marks   50 
(A) Art of Teaching                                                                              Marks 30  
(B) Other skills                                                                                   Marks 20   
A. Art of Teaching                                           
1. Teaching & Learning:- Meaning, Process & Characteristics.  
2. Teaching Objectives and Instructional objectives: Meaning & Types, Blooms 
Taxonomy.  
3.  Teaching Methods: - Types and its Characteristics, Merit, and demerits of 
Methods.  
4. Lesson Plan: - Types and Format & Various Model. 
5. Microteaching & Instructional analysis.  
6. Effective ecosystem of Classroom.  

=== PAGE 8 ===
7. Textbook and library 
8. Qualities of Teacher.  
9. Evaluation & Assessment for learning. 
10. Curriculum. 
11. Factors affecting teaching and learning. 
12. Teaching Aids and Hands on learning.  
B. Other skills  
1. General Knowledge,  
2.Environmental  Science  
3. Mathematical aptitude,  
4.logical Reasoning 
 
 
 

